Document editable packages (#1009)
conan-io/docs: mastering/editable_packages.rst

time he/she wants to work on ``cool/version@user/dev`` which is tightly coupled to the app.

Setting it all up
-----------------

The package ``cool/version@user/dev`` is already working, the developer has the sources in a
local folder, he/she is using whatever method to build and develop locally and can perform
a :command:`conan create . libCool/version@user/dev` to create the package.

Also, there is a *conanfile.txt* (or a more complex recipe) for the application ``CoolApp`` that
has ``cool/version@user/dev`` among its requirements. When building this application, the
resources of ``cool`` are used from the Conan local cache.

Put a package in editable mode
------------------------------

To avoid creating the package ``cool/version@user/dev`` in the cache for every change, we are going
to create **a link from the reference in the cache to the local working directory**:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan link <path/to/local/dev/libcool> cool/version@user/dev

and all we need is a file to tell Conan what is the layout of our local project in order to provide
the proper paths to the build system. There are several ways to achieve this objective:

>  * A file next to the *conanfile.py* with the name *.conan_layout*:

Reviewer: previous sentence talks about `conanfile.txt`, but now its `conanfile.py`, which is a bit confusing. is it a different conanfile from the previously mentioned?

Author: The only reference to a `conanfile.txt` appears in the previous section asociated with the application `CoolApp`:

> Also, there is a conanfile.txt (or a more complex recipe) for the application CoolApp that has cool/version@user/dev among its requirements. When building this application, the resources of cool are used from the Conan local cache.

In the line you are pointing to I'm talking about the package in editable mode, `cool/version@user/dev`. Nevertheless I'm going to change the line:

> A file next to the conanfile.py with the name .conan_layout:

by

> A file next to the conanfile.py (of the package `cool`) with the name .conan_layout:

It will be less confusing this way?

Reviewer: yeah, it's much less confusing now which conanfile are you referring to.

   .. code-block:: ini

       [includedirs]

>        src/core/include

Reviewer: for me its not obvious for which directory sub-directories like `src` and `build` are relative to?
to the `conanfile.txt` (`conanfile.py`)? or to the linked directory? or to the current directory?

       src/cmp_a/include

       [libdirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

       [bindirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

 * A file inside the Conan cache in the path *layouts/default*. As this file can contain information
   for several packages, each section must declare which packages it applies to, this is achieved
   using a *namespace* with the name of the package or the wildcard ``*``:

   .. code-block:: ini

       [cool:includedirs]
       src/core/include
       src/cmp_a/include

       [*:libdirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

       [*:bindirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

   This file can be very handy inside a company where all the packages have the same layout.

As you can see, you can use some **placeholders** inside these files that will be substituted with
the values of the ``settings`` and the ``options`` of the package.

Regarding the precedence if both files are present, Conan will use the one inside the repository if
present, then the one in the Conan cache, and if none is available, Conan will fallback to the

> directories defined in the ``package_info`` method of the recipe itself but relative to the path

Reviewer: which directories from `package_info`? includedirs? libdirs? both? something else?

change in this library that the user wants to be reflected in a consumer package, Conan has to
recreate the artifacts and copy all the stuff to the cache.

What about if you just can tell Conan where to find the headers and the artifacts ready for
consumption in your local working directory? Not need to package, just tell Conan to use those
artifacts you have just generated with your IDE, sounds good? This is what the feature
*editable packages* will do for you.

Let's see this feature over an example where a developer is creating a ``CoolApp`` but at the same
time he/she wants to work on ``cool/version@user/dev`` which is tightly coupled to the app.

Setting it all up
-----------------

The package ``cool/version@user/dev`` is already working, the developer has the sources in a
local folder, he/she is using whatever method to build and develop locally and can perform
a :command:`conan create . libCool/version@user/dev` to create the package.

Also, there is a *conanfile.txt* (or a more complex recipe) for the application ``CoolApp`` that
has ``cool/version@user/dev`` among its requirements. When building this application, the

> resources of ``cool`` are used from the *data* directory inside the Conan local cache.

Reviewer 2: No need to specify that the cache is actually un *data*
```suggestion
resources of ``cool`` are used from the Conan local cache.
```

Author: I was thinking about the _Conan home_... yes, the _cache_ is actually the _data_ directory.

Put a package in editable mode
------------------------------

To avoid creating the package ``cool/version@user/dev`` in the cache for every change, we can

> create **a link from the package in the cache to the local working directory**:

Author: I think it this way: you go from the cache to the local folder... ([+info](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=1984456))

> create **a link from the package in the cache to the local working directory**:

Reviewer 2: ok, but I would delete "the package" as this could imply that you actually can have different packages of the same reference in editable mode

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan link <path/to/local/dev/libcool> cool/version@user/dev

> and we need a file to tell Conan what is the layout of your local project in order to provide the

Author: I have modified a couple of things around this line (before the code-block and after) in the next commit, I think that now the present tense fits better.

proper paths to the build system. There are several ways to achieve this objective:

>  * A file next to the *conanfile.py* with the name *.conan_layout*:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Creating a *.conan_layout* next to next to the *conanfile.py*:
```

Reviewer 2: Don't you have to have a *cloned* repository with the sources? I think stating that explicitly is important

Author: No, a repository is not needed, just the `conanfile.py` and this file (if you are using it).

   .. code-block:: ini

       [includedirs]
       src/core/include
       src/cmp_a/include

       [libdirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

       [bindirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

>  * A file inside the Conan cache in the path *layouts/default*. As this file can contain information

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Creating a layout file *layouts/default* inside the Conan cache. As this file can contain information
```

   for several packages, each section must declare which packages it applies to, this is achieved
   using a *namespace* with the name of the package or the wildcard ``*``:

   .. code-block:: ini

       [cool:includedirs]
       src/core/include
       src/cmp_a/include

       [*:libdirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

       [*:bindirs]
       build/{settings.build_type}/{options.shared}

   This file can be very handy inside a company where all the packages have the same layout.

> As you can see, you can use inside these files some **placeholders** that will be substituted with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see, you can use some **placeholders** inside these files that will be substituted with
```

the values of the ``settings`` and the ``options`` of the package.

> About the precedence if both files are present, Conan will use the one inside the repository if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding the precedence if both files are present, Conan will use the one inside the repository if
```

present, then the one in the Conan cache, and if none is available, Conan will fallback to the

> directories defined in the ``package_info`` method of the recipe itself but related to the path

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
directories defined in the ``package_info`` method of the recipe itself but relative to the path
```

where the editable package has been linked to.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Using a package in editable mode
--------------------------------

> Once a package is in editable mode it is used **system wide** by Conan (by every Conan client that

Reviewer 2: I think here you can also say that the editable binaries will be used regardless of the profile settings (unless you use hte suitable placeholders)

Author: Is it not understood from the next sentence: _"Every `conan install`
command that requires our editable ``cool/version@user/dev`` package will use the paths to
the local directory"_

Reviewer 2: I understood it but I suspect we are a bit biased and it is better to be explicit

Author: I think that bias is thinking about different profile settings 😆 

But, yes, I will add a line there

uses the same cache), no changes are required in the consumers. Every :command:`conan install`
command that requires our editable ``cool/version@user/dev`` package will use the paths to
the local directory and the changes made to this project will be taken into account by the
packages using its headers or linking against it.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Revert the editable mode
------------------------

> In order to revert the editable mode, only the link has to be removed, there is command for that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to revert the editable mode just remove the link using:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan link --remove cool/version@user/dev

It will remove the link (the local directory won't be affected) and all the packages using this

> requirement will use the one in the cache again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
requirement will use the packages in the cache again.
```

Author: rephrased

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

.. warning::

   Packages that are built using an editable package in its graph upstreams can generate binaries
   and packages incompatible with the released version of the editable package. Avoid uploading
   these packages without re-creating them with the in-cache version of all the libraries.

.. note::

>    This is an experimental feature and it is in its early stage, it can suffer changes on its

Reviewer 2: Place this warning at the top of the section like the other ones to warn users from the beginning
